Add document on "Understanding DNS" (#11071)
istio/istio.io: content/en/docs/ops/configuration/traffic-management/dns/index.md

---
title: Understanding DNS
linktitle: DNS
description: How DNS interacts with Istio.

> weight: 30

Reviewer: It looks like we have several pages using the same weight. I'd at least pick one here so that the order is deterministic.

> weight: 30

Author: ```suggestion
weight: 31
```

keywords: [traffic-management,proxy]
owner: istio/wg-networking-maintainers
test: n/a
---

> Istio interacts with DNS in various different ways that can be confusing to understand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Istio interacts with DNS in different ways that can be confusing to understand.
```

This document provides a deep dive into how Istio and DNS work together.

{{< warning >}}

> This document describes low level implementation details. For a higher level overview, check out the traffic management [Concepts](/docs/concepts/traffic-management/) or [Tasks](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes low level implementation details. For a higher level overview, check out the traffic management [Concepts](/docs/concepts/traffic-management/) or [Tasks](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/) pages.
```

{{< /warning >}}

## Life of a request

In these examples, we will walk through what happens when an application runs `curl example.com`.
While `curl` is used here, the same applies to almost all clients.

When you send a request to a domain, a client will do DNS resolution to resolve that to an IP address.
This happens regardless of any Istio settings, as Istio only intercepts networking traffic; it cannot change your application's behavior or decision to send a DNS request.

> In the example below, `example.com` resolved to `192.0.2.0`.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be good to explain a little more here about how this happens, e.g., using `/etc/resolve` DNS configuration, kube-dns inside a kube cluster. Also would also be good to mention that it might not be able to resolve a host, which is where service entries come into play?

Author: That is the point I am trying to make - that Istio does NOT impact this at all. ServiceEntries do NOT come into play for the 99% of users not using the DNS proxy which is discussed more below. Will try to make this more clear

Reviewer 2: Yeah, but it seems like the rest of the document is always talking about the original IP address the client sent, without mentioning the case where the client DNS couldn't resolve, which is why lots of what is described later on is important. Maybe just clarify that this example assumes that the platform DNS successfully resolved the host but if not, then on line 33 `At this point, Istio will see both ...` would not be true, it would only have the host, so the service entry can not use `resolution: NONE`

Author: If they client can't resolve then thats the end of the story. There is no network request, so Istio doesn't know/care. Will add that to the doc

Reviewer 2: Perfect! Tying in (mentioning) the `## DNS Proxying` section below would also help, since otherwise the document flow is from client DNS, to Istio networking, and then back to client DNS ... which is a little confusing IMO.

{{< text bash >}}
$ curl example.com -v
*   Trying 192.0.2.0:80...
{{< /text >}}

Next, the request will be intercepted by Istio.
At this point, Istio will see both the hostname (from a `Host: example.com` header), and the destination address (`192.0.2.0:80`).

> Istio uses this information to determine what the intended destination is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Istio uses this information to determine the intended destination.
```

[Understanding Traffic Routing](/docs/ops/configuration/traffic-management/traffic-routing/) gives a deep dive into how this behavior works.

> Once Istio has identified the intended destination, Istio must chose which address to send to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once Istio has identified the intended destination, it must choose which address to send to.
```

> Once we have identified the intended destination, Istio much chose which address to send to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once Istio has identified the intended destination, Istio much chose which address to send to.
```

> Once we have identified the intended destination, Istio much chose which address to send to.

Reviewer 2: much cho
```suggestion
Once we have identified the intended destination, Istio much chose which address to send to.
```
```suggestion
Once we have identified the intended destination, Istio must choose which address to send to.
```

* Use the original IP address of the client (`192.0.2.0`, in the example above).
  This is the case for `ServiceEntry` of type `resolution: NONE` (the default) and [headless `Services`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#headless-services).
* Load balance over a set of static IP addresses.
  This is the case for `ServiceEntry` of type `resolution: STATIC`, where all `spec.endpoints` will be used, or for standard `Services`, where all `Endpoints` will be used.
* Periodically resolve an address using DNS, and load balance across all results.
  This is the case for `ServiceEntry` of type `resolution: DNS`.

Note that in all cases, DNS resolution within the Istio proxy is orthogonal to DNS resolution in a user application.
Even when the client does DNS resolution, the proxy may ignore the resolved IP address and use its own, which could be from
a static list of IPs or by doing its own DNS resolution (potentially of the same hostname or a different one).

## Proxy DNS resolution

Unlike most clients, which will do DNS requests on demand at the time of requests (and then typically cache the results),
the Istio proxy never does synchronous DNS requests.

> When a `resolution: DNS` type `ServiceEntry` is configured, the proxy will periodically resolve the configured hostnames and used those for all requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a `resolution: DNS` type `ServiceEntry` is configured, the proxy will periodically resolve the configured hostnames and use those for all requests.
```

This interval is determined by the [TTL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_to_live#DNS_records) of the DNS response.
This happens even if the proxy never sends any requests to these applications.

> For meshes with many proxies or many `resolution: DNS` type `ServiceEntries`, especially when low `TTL`s are used, this may cause high load on DNS servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For meshes with many proxies or many `resolution: DNS` type `ServiceEntries`, especially when low `TTL`s are used, this may cause a high load on DNS servers.
```

In these cases, the following can help reduce the load:

> * Switch to `resolution: NONE`, to avoid proxy DNS lookups entirely. This is suitable for many use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Switch to `resolution: NONE` to avoid proxy DNS lookups entirely. This is suitable for many use cases.
```

{{< /warning >}}

## Life of a request

In these examples, we will walk through what happens when an application runs `curl example.com`.
While `curl` is used here, the same applies to almost all clients.

When you send a request to a domain, a client will do DNS resolution to resolve that to an IP address.
This happens regardless of any Istio settings, as Istio only intercepts networking traffic; it cannot change your application's behavior or decision to send a DNS request.
In the example below, `example.com` resolved to `192.0.2.0`.

{{< text bash >}}
$ curl example.com -v
*   Trying 192.0.2.0:80...
{{< /text >}}

Next, the request will be intercepted by Istio.
At this point, Istio will see both the hostname (from a `Host: example.com` header), and the destination address (`192.0.2.0:80`).
Istio uses this information to determine the intended destination.
[Understanding Traffic Routing](/docs/ops/configuration/traffic-management/traffic-routing/) gives a deep dive into how this behavior works.

If the client was unable to resolve the DNS request, the request would terminate before Istio receives it.

> This means that if a request is sent to a hostname which is known to Istio (for example, by a `VirtualService`), but not to the DNS server, the request will fail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that if a request is sent to a hostname which is known to Istio (for example, by a `VirtualService`) but not to the DNS server, the request will fail.
```

the Istio proxy never does synchronous DNS requests.
When a `resolution: DNS` type `ServiceEntry` is configured, the proxy will periodically resolve the configured hostnames and use those for all requests.
This interval is determined by the [TTL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_to_live#DNS_records) of the DNS response.
This happens even if the proxy never sends any requests to these applications.

For meshes with many proxies or many `resolution: DNS` type `ServiceEntries`, especially when low `TTL`s are used, this may cause a high load on DNS servers.
In these cases, the following can help reduce the load:

* Switch to `resolution: NONE` to avoid proxy DNS lookups entirely. This is suitable for many use cases.
* If you control the domains being resolved, increase their TTL.
* If your `ServiceEntry` is only needed by a few workloads, limit its scope with `exportTo` or a [`Sidecar`](/docs/reference/config/networking/sidecar/).

## DNS Proxying

Istio offers a feature to [proxy DNS requests](/docs/ops/configuration/traffic-management/dns-proxy/).
This allows Istio to capture DNS requests sent by the client and return a response directly.

> This can improve DNS latency, reduce load, and allow `ServiceEntry`s, which otherwise would not be known to `kube-dns`, to be resolved.

Reviewer 2: Make this one consistent with all the other ones in the doc.
```suggestion
This can improve DNS latency, reduce load, and allow `ServiceEntries`, which otherwise would not be known to `kube-dns`, to be resolved.
```
